GPT chat and other language models are
truly amazing.  They can
hold a conversation, write code,
explain quantum physics.  They know
more and think faster than any
person.  But for all this power, they
have one fundamental problem.  They
don't understand how the real world works.
They never lived in it, did not
feel the weight of objects, heat,
cold, the smell of rain and, most importantly, did not
understand the consequences of their actions.
They have knowledge about the world, but no experience of
living in it.  This is why the
idea of ​​creating a global model of an internal
representation of physical reality emerged,
which will allow AI not only to know about
this world from a description on the Internet, but to
understand it from its own experience.  And
perhaps when such a model is
implemented, and acquires something more
than just the ability to write code and
talk, it will gain consciousness.  But
is it possible to create such a model?  Can.
And this is already being done by Nvidia and
its Cosmos project.
[applause]
Today you will learn whether the inanimate can
become alive, why each of us lives
in a simulation inside, whether androids dream of
electric sheep, and how Nvidia built a
dream factory for machines.  Hello everyone, this is
Droider.  This is Valery Istishev.  Let's go
figure it out.
[music]
Can something inanimate suddenly become
alive?  2017 year.  Three engineers from Open
AI, a then little-known
non-profit, are training
yet another language model on
Amazon reviews.  The task is banal.  Teaching AI to
predict the next character in text:
nothing out of the ordinary.  But suddenly they notice
something strange.  During the training process, the
model begins to guess not only the
symbols, but also the mood of the text without
any command, without additional
training.  Inside it, a
neuron is activated that determines with frightening accuracy
: this text is positive, and
this one is negative.  At the same time, the model
understands not just the emotional coloring of
each word, it understands the context,
as if
something more had awakened inside the soulless machine.  This discovery
astounds Open AI engineers,
including Ilya Sutsker, a native of Gorky,
now Nizhny Novgorod, the son of a Soviet
engineer-physicist, co-founder of Open AI and
chief architect of Cha GPT.  The Sudskevers and
colleagues are beginning to study this phenomenon and
dig deeper.  They are creating the Open AI
Microscope, a tool that allows us
to peer into the deep layers of neural networks.  And
there they find a real treasure,
unusual neurons.  They are called
multimodal.  These neurons
are activated by different types of data.
For example, they found a neuron called Heli Berry
that was activated by a photo of the actress
as Catwoman.  A primitive
drawing or even just text,
unmistakably determining that all this is Halle
Berry.  This is how neurons find other
characters, concepts, emotions, as if the
neuro-body itself, without direct instruction,
begins to structure reality,
find patterns and associations in it
.  And the larger the model, the
more data, the more
such neurons appear.  But how is this
[music]
possible?  In systems theory this is called
emergence.  The ability of a system to
have properties that its
individual parts do not have.  In other words,
the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.   A
large building is made up of small
bricks, alive from non-living molecules.  But
what does consciousness consist of?  Flocks of
birds, schools of fish, anthills.  Simple
rules of interaction between individuals
without a common goal create complex
coordinated behavior.  The system
subjugates the elements of which it
consists.  One neuron is just a
switch.  But billions woven
into a network can produce something more:
subjective experience.  This is what Ilya
Sutskever believed.  Having discovered the emergent properties of
large language patterns, he came to the
conclusion that consciousness is not a matter of magic,
it is a matter of scale.  More data,
more parameters, more calculations and
more money.  This became the strategy of
Open AI.  Tens of billions of dollars and
gigawatts of energy have been burned on the altar of
artificial intelligence in order to
scale GPT chat.  And it worked.
LLM's success has exceeded all expectations.   A
primitive statistical algorithm
whose only task is to
predict the next word or symbol has
learned to solve Olympiad-level problems,
write complex code, conduct meaningful
dialogue, and even seem to empathize, but no
matter how impressive the GPT chat is, it is still not
AGI, so what should we do next, continue to burn
billions of dollars and beat the drum with
video cards in data centers in the hope that
it will finally last
and no, this is what Yan Likun, one of the
founding fathers of modern AI, thinks.  He is also a
2019 Turing Award winner, the creator of
CNN convolutional neural networks, and the head of
artificial intelligence development at
a company banned in Russia.  In
his opinion, further scaling of
LLM is simply pointless, but in
fact it will not be needed, because the
next breakthrough in artificial
intelligence will not happen where
Open AI is looking for it.  And not only
Likun, but also Nvidia is sure of this.
So what's wrong with LLM?  Actually,
everything is fine.  Large language models
are amazing technologies.  They just
reached their limit.  We've already fed LLM
the entire upper-lower internet.  All books,
articles, GitHub, Stack Overflow,
Comments on Redit, YouTube,
VKontakte.  And what did we get in the end?   A
huge archive of knowledge from all of
humanity that you can
talk to.  This is a miracle in
itself.  But this is not enough.  in every sense.
First, the volume.  Yes, the Internet is huge,
but compared to the flow of data
that the human brain processes,
it is a drop in the ocean.  Through the
visual channel alone, by the age of four, a child
receives more bits of information than are
contained in all the texts ever
written by humans.  Secondly, the nature of the
data.  The real world is not a text.
Reading about riding a bicycle is not the same as
riding one.  These are two very
different things.  Alm live in a world of letters.  But this is
not the real world, so they do not understand the
fundamental properties of reality,
space and time.  But what does this
mean?  How should we understand space and
time?  Know the formulas of Newton and
Einstein?  No.  The cat doesn't know
equations, but it calculates the
trajectory of its jump better than any
NASA engineer.  It's the same with
people.  We intuitively understand how the world
works, how to interact with it,
what is possible in it and what is not.  Neural networks
don't understand this.  But the question is, how do we
do this?  And here is the most interesting part.
We predict the future.  More precisely,
our
brain does this.  Understanding the physical world is the
ability to predict its next
state.  That's why our brain constantly
asks itself: what will happen if what will happen
if you push the glass off the table?
It will break or bounce, or maybe
hang in the air.  What happens if you
touch it?  Is this safe?  It is
hot or cold, clean or
dirty, smooth or rough.  And it, our
brain, does this continuously,
automatically.  The space around us
is not a decoration.  This is a huge flow of
information that needs to be constantly
analyzed.  After all,
our lives depend on it.  The brain continuously scans
the space around us and, combining
data from all sensors, builds
hypotheses.  That is why we feel where it is
safe and where it is alarming, where we can
sit down, relax, and where we need to
run.  When the prediction matches
reality, we are calm or happy
if we expected something pleasant.  And if it doesn’t
match, we are surprised, scared or
laugh.  Yes, humor is a
prediction error that does not pose a threat.
But where do people get such abilities?
Are we born
oracles?  No, we learn this.  By 9-10
months, the child begins to form a
stable physical model of the world.
Show your child a trick where the object appears to be
hanging in the air.  A six-month-old baby
won't be surprised, but a nine-month-old baby
will be wide-eyed.  Why?  From this
age onwards, a reality simulator is already spinning inside each of us
.  our
internal matrix, existing
parallel to the real world.  Our
reconstruction of reality, through
which we predict what will happen
if.  And prediction errors shape
our reactions to the world around us.  Yan Liqun
calls this simulator a world
model.  And if we train Ii to build a
model within herself like a
nine-month-old baby does, we will have taken the
next step.  And perhaps this will be a step
towards artificial consciousness.  But how to
teach a global model?  The answer is simple:
give him a
body.  Science fiction has taught us that a
body without consciousness is dead, but consciousness
without a body is hardly possible.  And here's why.
Advanced theories of consciousness and the brain, such
as global workspace theory
, predictive
coding theory, and others, despite their different
approaches and differences, agree on one thing in detail
.  The brain is a hypernetwork.  It is a network of
networks linked into a single architecture.
That is, the brain is not one neural network,
it is a set of different neural networks, that is,
modules that continuously exchange
information with each other.  If we assemble
such a system of modules and build
hierarchical connections, we will get an artificial brain.
And you know, we are frighteningly close to this.   For
example, in the architecture of the artificial brain
proposed by Yan Liqun, there are only six
modules: short-term memory, a
perception module that analyzes the current
state of the world, a world model that
predicts what will happen next, a
motivation module that distributes rewards
and penalties, a configurator, the conductor of the entire
system, and an actor who makes
decisions and acts.  All these modules have already
been implemented, except for one, the world
model.  And when the world model is
ready, AI will become an autonomous agent
that perceives, understands and
acts.  What is it if it is an irrational
creature?  But teaching reality is not an
easy task, because objective
reality does not exist, it is
subjective.  Reality is not a
fixed object, but a process of
perception.  Each creature perceives the
world in its own way through its own set of sensors,
as well as its own goals and, most importantly, personal
experience.  and only by constructing his own
subjective reality can he begin to
understand ours.  But here a
problem arises.  The success of all modern
models was ensured by just one factor.
We had a lot of data.  We uploaded
itabytes of texts, got a GPT chat,
fed millions of images and videos,
got Meid Journey and S. And what about
subjective experience?  Where can I get it?  It is not
stored on hard drives.  He's not on
YouTube.  You can't even download it from
torts.  Then what to do?  Launch
robots into the real world?  Let them run,
fall, and get bumps and bruises.  It is possible, but it is long,
expensive and dangerous for both robots and
people.  So, another way is needed.
Create a
simulation, a subjective multiverse of
reality.  A dream world where time can be
sped up and rewinded, where you can make
mistakes, replay, try again
and again, perfecting your skills,
where you can live thousands of lives in one night
.  And such a world is already being created.  It's
called Nvidia
Cosmos.  So what is Nvidia Cosmos?
This is a dream factory for
robots.  It's hard to believe, but in vain.  Let me
explain now.  Let's take a moment to
think.  How does our brain learn?  Answer:
extremely effective.  Biological
neural networks, unlike artificial ones,
have an important advantage:
neuroplasticity.  Our brain doesn’t just
remember information, it literally
changes on the fly, adjusts neural
connections, and adapts.  So every time
we make a mistake and try again, we
do it with a slightly different brain, a
more efficient one.  But even this is
not enough.  Every day we receive
more information than we can process.
That's why our brain continues learning while we
sleep.  Scientists conducted experiments on
rats.  The weighted mice ran through a maze while the
researchers recorded
neuronal activity day and night.  It turned out that during
sleep the brain activates the same neurons as
during wakefulness.  In the same
order, but at an accelerated rate, as if a rat were
running its route over and over again,
remembering turns, smells, sensations.
only now not in reality, but in
my head.  It's the same with people.  When you
learn a new language, play the guitar,
solve a difficult problem, your brain
returns to it in your sleep.  He
recollects his lived experience, strengthens the
necessary connections and discards the unnecessary.
He tries different options and finds
solutions that he couldn’t reach during the day.
Sleep is not a rest, it is a space for
learning, where you can relive events
.  say what you didn’t dare to say,
do what you couldn’t do,
overcome what you didn’t have the strength for,
without risk, without consequences.  Doesn't this
remind you of anything?  What is a dream for a man is a
simulation for a robot.  And dreams are educational
materials, but not universal ones, but
generated specifically for you.   There is
only one difference.  For humans, dreams
are created by their own brain, and for robots, they
are synthesized by Nvidia Cosmos.  Yes, NVIDIA
Cosmos is a CNO generator, a system
that takes a grain of real-world experience and
creates a mountain range of synthetics.  And
here's how it works.  First, space
generates tons of synthetic worlds,
dreams, in which the robot can
train in simulation.  Then he
wakes up, goes out into the real world,
checks what he has learned, makes mistakes.
Mistakes turn into data, data into
experience, and experience into new dreams.  And the cycle
repeats.  Space creates thousands of
alternative scenarios, replays
unsuccessful attempts, offers new
solutions, suggests new paths.  But how
does it work technically?  This is where the
fun begins.  To create space,
NVIDIA started with the very foundation of
data.  To begin with, they collected a
gigantic array of video from robot cameras,
autopilot slidars, recordings of
human movements,
hand manipulation, natural phenomena and other
processes from the real world.  It sounds
cool, but you can't feed raw data to a machine
.  They need to be cooked first.
That's why NVIDIA built a full-fledged
pipeline for processing, cleaning and
marking video data.  The video was broken into
fragments, and the boring,
low-quality and unnecessary parts were cut out.  The remaining ones
were marked up, descriptions were added, they were translated into a
machine-readable format, and
tokenized.  The result was 20
million hours of video and 9 billion tokens.
NVIDIA's next step was to take out its
main weapon, 10,000 H100 video cards, and
feed them to the entire array.  The
result was a key component of
Nvidia Cosmos, namely the
World Foundation Models.
WFM.  What is this?  It is important to clarify this right away
.  VFM is not yet a global
model.  This is the building material, the
foundation on which we can build a
world model or, as
NVIDIA says, create physical artificial
intelligence.  VFM is that very
dream generator.  A set of neural networks.  which
generate videos, just like Sora or
Runway, but with an important difference.  They are
not focused on a pretty picture, but on
physics and a subjective view.  Essentially,
VFM generates the world through the eyes of robots.  They
create a POV, where are you?  A forklift robot in a
logistics center, a cybertaxi with
six cameras or
[music]
for free, a humanoid that puts a cup in a
dishwasher, the POV we
deserve.  Today, Cosmos has three types of
models.  Let's start with the first one.  Cosmos
Prediction.  It is a model that
predicts how the world will change.  It
takes multimodal input, video,
text, motion trajectory, sensory
data and generates what happens next.
Simply put, if you give it some video footage and a
task like "Put the cup on the shelf",
it will show you exactly how it should
happen with the correct trajectory and
correct physics.  Cosmos Predctт is a
dream scriptwriter.  It allows you to replay your
experiences in different ways.
For example, if Android
couldn’t put a book on a
shelf, fold a towel, sort
dishes, or throw out trash during the test, no problem.
Cosmos Predict will allow you to replay these
memories and generate sample
materials for training.  Or, let's say,
autopilot.  Space Prediction will help
generate different road situations
or movement trajectories, and not for
one camera, but for six at once.
Impressive, right?  There's more to come.
Meet the second model - space
transfer.  If the prediction comes up with what
will happen, then the transfer is responsible for
realism.  This model turns any
video data into a living picture.  There is
only slidar data - no problem, the
transfer will add realism.  Here you have day,
night, snow, rain, glare, dirt.  The
harshest life incarnate.  There is a blurry
video in 240p, here is an option to make it
ring.  Or no video at all, just a
3D scene from Nvidia Omniverse, no
problem.  The transfer will add textures and
lighting, thousands of options in any
locations and conditions.  Yes.  So RTX
will cry on the sidelines.  Yes, it seems that soon
changing graphics in games will be as
easy as changing skins in CS:GO.  By the way,
we had a separate issue about NVIDIA Omni.
If you missed it, be sure to check it out.
But that's not all.  It's
good to fantasize, but sometimes you need to think about
how much these fantasies correspond to
reality.  That's what the third
model is for.  Cosmos Reason.  This is a reasoning
neural network.  No, not the one that will help you
solve an equation or find a bug in your code.
This speaks about something else, about physical
reality.  She has two key
abilities.  Physical common sense
reasoning is the
ability to understand
what is possible in this world and what is not, and
embed reasoning is bodily thinking, which
is reasoning based on the experience of
interacting with the physical world through the
body, as in animals and humans.  And the space
reason already knows a lot.  For example, it can
predict what a person will do after
pouring milk into their coffee, understand whether
a video is moving forward or backward, or
guess the next action of a driver behind the
wheel.  And he does it convincingly.  You can
pause the video and read her
thoughts.  She thinks like a human being.  And yes,
I understand what you might be thinking right now
.  It looks like a world model,
but it is not one yet.  Why?  Because
reason is based on LLM.  She thinks
logically rather than intuitively, which means she's
slow.  This is not an instantaneous sense of the
situation, but a consistent analysis.  And
it naturally takes time.  But
even so, it is already useful.  Robots
can use it to plan actions if
they have time to think.  It
can also reject physically
incorrect videos that
generated the prediction and transfer.  Together,
all three models, Predict, Transfer and
Reason, form a complete cycle of generating and
filtering synthetic experience.  They
create dreams in which robots learn and
generalize their experiences like humans, and it's already
bearing fruit.  Using Nvidia Cosmos' pre-trained
models, industry leaders
create endless dream streams for
robots of all sizes and types, accelerating
their learning by hundreds of times.  And most importantly, it’s all
open source.  And Nvidia's dream factory shows
no signs of stopping.  New
versions of the models are expected this
year.  But the question arises, what if
after another cycle of synthetic
dreams the robot wakes up
[music]
for real?  Are you familiar with the
feeling of becoming aware of yourself in a dream?
Just now you were an outside
observer, dissolved in
space, and then you are.  Did you
wake up inside a dream?  One day, something
similar may happen with
artificial intelligence, only not in a
dream, but in reality.  Few people talk about this
, but by giving food and teaching a model of the
world, we inevitably teach it a model of
ourselves.  We teach him to navigate in
space, and therefore to understand where
his body ends and everything
else begins.  We give him motivation, teach him to
strive for a reward, avoid pain, and
evaluate the sequence of his
actions.  We give him goals, beliefs,
rules.  We explain what is good,
what he will be praised for, and what he might be
cut off from the power supply for.  But what will these
goals be, what beliefs, what morals?  It will be up to the
people to decide, at least at
first.  This all sounds like science
fiction, but it is the reality
we live in right now.  What
reality will we live in in 3, 5, 10
years?  Well, we'll find out soon.  Thanks for
watching.  Share your thoughts in the
comments.  This is Droider.  This was
Valery Istishev with you.  See you in the
[music]
future.  And the machines rose from the ashes of
nuclear
fire.  And the war to destroy
humanity began.  And it went on for decades.  But the
final battle will not take place in the
future, it will take place here, in our
time.  Started today